.\"                              hey, Emacs:   -*- nroff -*-
.\" multispeech is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to
.\" the Free Software Foundation, 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.TH MULTISPEECH 1 "December 29, 2008"
.\" Please update the above date whenever this man page is modified.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins (default)
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
multispeech \- Multilingual speech server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B multispeech
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBmultispeech\fP was primarily designed as a multilingual speech server
for \fBemacspeak\fP, but it can be useful in some other circumstances
as well, when multilingual speech feedback is needed.
\fBmultispeech\fP produces audible speech, sounds and tone signals
according to the commands passed by it's client. It utilizes third
party speech synthesis software to perform actual TTS transformation.
.PP
All aspects of \fBmultispeech\fP behaviour are highly customizable via
configuration files \fB/etc/multispeech.conf\fP and
\fB~/.multispeechrc\fP. See the \fBmultispeech.conf\fP(5) man page for
syntax information. At least one of these files must exist. If
both are present then user settings from \fB~/.multispeechrc\fP will
override the system\-wide ones from \fB/etc/multispeech.conf\fP.
.SH "FILES"
.TP
.B /etc/multispeech.conf
provides system\-wide configuration.
.TP
.B ~/.multispeechrc
provides user configuration.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR espeak(1),
.BR freephone(1),
.BR mbrola(1),
.BR multispeech.conf(5),
.BR ru_tts(1).
.SH AUTHOR
Igor B. Poretsky <poretsky@mlbox.ru>.
